---
title: Tools & Reference
description: Tools and resources for Japanese learners
layout: ../../../layouts/MainLayout.astro
---

Learning any language is a major, lifelong undertaking. Anyone claiming it can
be easy is trying to sell you something.

Still, it's never been easier. The advent of the internet[^1] has made learning
_anything_ easier, and Japanese is no exception.

[^1]:
    YouTube, Wanikani, and even the internet weren't available when the author
    first started formally studying the language!

## 1. Learn to read

As mentioned elsewhere, Japanese is _much_ easier to study if you can read the
language. The diagrams on this site won't be of much use to you if you can't.

### a. Hiragana and katakana

Learning the two phonetic syllabaries, hiragana and katakana, isn't a huge
undertaking and should be your first step toward learning the language. It
should only take a week or two at most to learn both.

The best resources I'm aware of are [Tofugu's Learn Hiragana: The Ultimate Guide
](https://www.tofugu.com/japanese/learn-hiragana/), as well as [Tofugu's Learn
Katakana: The Ultimate Guide](https://www.tofugu.com/japanese/learn-katakana/).
Both have accompanying books, and both are completely free.

### b. Kanji _(gulp!)_

This is probably the single biggest hurdle to becoming proficient in Japanese.

The most important part of learning a language is _massive_ amounts of input. If
you can't read the language, you cut yourself off from huge swaths of available
content (including _all_ content available online written by Japanese natives).

Learning kanji helps you understand when words are related and when they aren't.
It helps you to reason about the language.

It _is_ possible to learn Japanese without learning to read kanji, but it's
much, much harder. Don't be like the author and wait _decades_ to learn how to read.

Expectations are important:

Even with the best state-of-the-art tools available, it will take anyone _at least_ a year to
memorize enough kanji to read much of anything. More realistically, it will take
_several_ years and is something you never really stop learning.

#### Wanikani.com

For the author, [Wanikani.com](https://wanikani.com) was a godsend. In roughly 3
years, he learned to read well over 2,000 individual kanji characters and well
over 6,000 vocabulary words (this is considered a fairly modest pace by many on
the site). Wanikani is completely free for the first three levels. The remaining
57 levels require a paid subscription.

#### Kitsun.io

[Kitsun](https://kitsun.io/) is also mentioned frequently by people the author
respects (though he's never used the service). It's also a paid service, and
uses a spaced-repetition-system (SRS) like Wanikani. In particular, like Wanikani it
forces you to explicitly prove you've learned something by typing it in (rather
than just clicking a button to indicate how easy or difficult an item was).

#### Anki

For those more technically minded, [Anki](https://apps.ankiweb.net/) is a
completely free option. It's excruciatingly configurable and can be hooked into
other tools mentioned here.

Anki is an SRS tool for memorizing absolutely anything (it's pretty much the defacto
memorization tool of choice for medical students).

For learning to read Japanese specifically, the [animecards
site](https://animecards.site/ankisetup/) has several useful recommendations for
configuring Anki.

## 2. Learn grammar

You should start studying basic Japanese grammar while you are learning to read.
It's better to learn a bit about grammar as you build your vocabulary rather
than trying to do things sequentially.

Japanese grammar is also an incredibly deep subject, but in many ways it's
actually simpler and more logical than English grammar.

The author's favorite [grammar resources](/en/grammar-intro#grammar-resources)
are listed in the grammar section of this site.

The author isn't convinced that an SRS is the right tool for learning grammar,
but many people recommend [bunpro.jp](https://bunpro.jp/) as well.

## 3. Add dictionaries

Our vocabulary never stops growing. It's possible to learn some words from
context, but it's almost always easier to look things up in a dictionary.

Few of us even own any paper dictionaries any more, which is a shame. There are
some really great ones. Kenkyusha's 新和英辞典 is pretty much the gold
standard in Japanese-English dictionaries if you happen to come across one in a
used bookstore.

### Apps and browser plugins

#### Yomichan

First and foremost, stop reading this and immediately install
[Yomichan](https://foosoft.net/projects/yomichan/).

The author can't recommend Yomichan highly enough. It makes consuming Japanese
content online _so_ much easier!

Yomichan is a browser plugin (for Chrome or Firefox). Any Japanese text
displayed in your browser (including Gmail and social media) becomes trivial to
look up: just hover your mouse over an unknown word while holding down the shift
key, and a detailed definition pops up on your screen.

Not having to cut-and-paste into an online dictionary doesn't seem like that big
of a deal, but avoiding the mental "context-switch" is an unbelievably _huge_
win. Looking up words simply and easily, in-context, without having to open up
even another tab in your browser is a profound win.

It's so good that even if you prefer another browser, the author recommends
installing Chrome or Firefox expressly for consuming Japanese content with
Yomichan.

[TheMoeWay](https://learnjapanese.moe/yomichan/) has a nice tutorial on how to
configure Yomichan (including adding audio sources, integrating with Anki,
_etc._).

The default jmdict and kanjidic dictionaries are more than sufficient to get
started, but more advanced learners will quickly benefit from adding more
(including monolingual, japanese-japanese dictionaries).

#### Phone Apps

The author uses an iPhone. His favorite dictionary app is
[Yomiwa](https://www.yomiwa.net/) which is also available for Android.

In addition to looking up words and characters phonetically (typing), it allows
you to look up words by radical, by drawing with your finger, or even with
optical recognition. The latter can be incredibly handy when looking up words
from dead-tree books.

The Outlier kanji dictionary (an optional paid addition) can be fascinating for
learning the history behind some of these characters.

## Online resources

### Dictionaries

Probably the most popular bilingual dictionary online (for good reason) is
[Jisho.org](https://jisho.org).

It's well worth learning some of the [search options](https://jisho.org/docs)
available.

While bilingual (Japanese-English) dictionaries will likely always be in one's
repertoire, it's a very good idea to get in the habit of using _monolingual_
(Japanese-Japanese) dictionaries whenever (and as soon as) possible. If nothing
else, it gives you more practice reading Japanese.

More importantly, some nuance is inevitably lost when translating between
languages. It pays to see how Japanese natives define words in their own
language.

The author's favorite online monolingual dictionary is [Weblio's 国語辞
典](https://weblio.jp).

As usual, [Moe has some good recommendations](https://learnjapanese.moe/monolingual/#online-dictionaries).

### Sentence databases

One thing that tends not to occur to beginners is the power of searching
professionally translated sentences. Seeing how a word or particular grammatical
construct was translated by a professional can be incredibly helpful.

The ["Tanaka corupus" and the tatoeba
project](http://www.edrdg.org/wiki/index.php/Tanaka_Corpus) were developed
expressly for this purpose.

The author regularly searches the [Weblio 英語例 Japanese-to-English sentence
database](https://ejje.weblio.jp/sentence/) to see how Japanese words are used
in context.

You can also look up words in [Linguee](https://www.linguee.com/). In addition
to providing definitions, it links to "external sources" that used that word or
phrase (usually translations of academic material).

### AI translation services

"NLP" (natural language processing) is an extremely active research space in the
artificial intelligence community.

While they can still be startlingly wrong or at least misleading on occasion, it
can be extremely useful to feed an AI model a sentence or more of text to see
how it would translate it (in either direction).

Google and Apple both have AI translation engines (both web based and on your
phone). They improve almost daily and can be a great help to learners.

The author's favorite AI translation service is [DeepL
translate](https://www.deepl.com/translator).

### Other resources

Learners may also find the following resources useful:

- [Tae Kim's Japanese grammar guide](http://guidetojapanese.org/learn/complete/)

- [Satori reader](https://www.satorireader.com/). This is an excellent paid
  resource with professionally translated and graded content to practice your
  reading.
- This [online Japanese expression etymology site](https://gogen-yurai.jp/)

- [Japanese baseball
  terms](https://www.fluentu.com/blog/japanese/japanese-baseball-vocabulary-words-phrases-list/)
  (Apologies, the author is both a Hanshin Tigers and SF Giants fan [yeah, he knows].)

---
